Vincent van Gogh to Theo van Gogh : c. 4 June 1888

 » Home

 < Previous   Next >

 Letter from Vincent van Gogh to Theo van Gogh
Arles, c. 4 June 1888

 Relevant paintings:

"Seascape at Saintes-Maries," Vincent van Gogh
[Enlarge]

"Seascape at Saintes-Maries," Vincent van Gogh
[Enlarge]

"View of Saintes-Maries," Vincent van Gogh
[Enlarge]

"View of Stes-Maries," Vincent van Gogh
[Enlarge]

My dear Theo,

I am at last writing to you from Stes-Maries on the shore of
 the Mediterranean. The Mediterranean has the colours of
 mackerel, changeable I mean. You don't always know if it is
 green or violet, you can't even say it's blue, because the next
 moment the changing light has taken on a tinge of pink or
 gray.

A family is a queer thing - quite involuntary and in spite
 of myself I have been thinking here between whiles of our
 sailor uncle, who must have seen the shores of this sea many a
 time.

I brought three canvases and have covered them - two
 marines, a view of the village, and then some drawings
 which I will send you by post when I return to Arles tomorrow.

I have board and lodging for 4 francs a day and they began
 by asking 6.

As soon as I can, I shall probably come back again to make
 some more studies.

The shore here is sandy, neither cliffs nor rocks - like
 Holland without the dunes, and bluer.

You get better fried fish here than on the Seine. Only fish
 is not available every day, as the fishermen go off and sell it
 in Marseilles. But when there is some, it's frightfully
 good.

If there isn't - the butcher is not much more appetizing
 than the fellah butcher of M. Gérôme's - if there
 is no fish, it is pretty difficult to get anything to eat, as
 far as I can see.

I do not think there are 100 houses in the village, or town.
 The chief building, after the old church and an ancient
 fortress, is the barracks. And the houses - like the ones on
 our heaths and peat bogs in Drenthe; you will see some
 specimens of them in the drawings.

I am forced to leave my three painted studies here, for of
 course they are not dry enough to be submitted with safety to
 five hours' jolting in the carriage.

But I expect to come back here again.

Next week I'd like to go to Tarascon to do two or three
 studies.

If you have not written yet, I shall naturally expect the
 letter at Arles.

A very fine gendarme came to interview me here, and the
 curé too - the people can't be very bad here, because
 even the curé looked almost like a decent fellow.

Next month it will be the season for open-air bathing here.
 The number of bathers varies from 20 to 50. I am staying till
 tomorrow afternoon, I still have some drawings to do.

One night I went for a walk by the sea along the empty
 shore. It was not gay, but neither was it sad - it was -
 beautiful. The deep blue sky was flecked with clouds of a blue
 deeper than the fundamental blue of intense cobalt, and others
 of a clearer blue, like the blue whiteness of the Milky Way. In
 the blue depth the stars were sparkling, greenish, yellow,
 white, pink, more brilliant, more emeralds, lapis lazuli,
 rubies, sapphires. The sea was very deep ultramarine - the
 shore a sort of violet and faint russet as I saw it, and on the
 dunes (they are about seventeen feet high) some bushes Prussian
 blue.

Besides half-page drawings I have a big drawing, the pendant
 of the last one. Good-by for the present only, I hope, with a
 handshake,

Ever yours, Vincent

 At this time, Vincent was 35 year old
Source:
Vincent van Gogh. Letter to Theo van Gogh. Written c. 4 June 1888 in Arles. Translated by Mrs. Johanna van Gogh-Bonger, edited by Robert Harrison, number 499.
URL: https://www.webexhibits.org/vangogh/letter/18/499.htm. 

This letter may be freely used, in accordance with the terms of this site.

 » Home

 < Previous   Next >

 Browse by topic

 webexhibits.org/vangogh/         Credits & feedback
